LIKE THE
SPRAWLING, COMPLEX,
AND DYNAMIC CONTINENT
ITSELF, THE LITERATURE
OF LATIN AMERICA IS
FAR FROM HOMOGENEOUS.
UNDER ITS BROAD
TENT THERE COEXIST
DIVERSE PERSPECTIVES,
ANTITHETICAL MOVEMENTS,
AND DIVISIVE POLEMICS.
AT ANY GIVEN TIME IN ITS
HISTORY, THE WRITING OF
LATIN AMERICA ENCOMPASSES
RADICALLY DIFFERENT WAYS
OF CONCEIVING LITERATURE
BOTH AS AN AESTHETIC ACT
AND AS A PART OF SOCIAL
AND POLITICAL LIFE.
THE FIRST DECADES OF
THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
WERE NO EXCEPTION.
THESE YEARS WERE MARKED
BY THE INNOVATIONS OF
MODERNISMO - AN ARTISTIC
MOVEMENT IMBUED WITH THE
SPIRIT OF INNOVATION AND
LINGUISTIC REINVENTION.
THIS PERIOD ALSO SAW THE
ARRIVAL OF THE AVANT GARDE
WHICH SUMMARILY
DISMISSED TRADITIONAL
MEANS OF DISCOURSE
AND REPLACED THEM WITH
A FRACTURED AND
ANXIOUS WORLD VIEW.
ALMOST IMMEDIATELY THERE
AROSE ZEALOUS RESPONSES
TO MODERNISMO.
AT THE SAME TIME,
WRITERS CONCEIVED OF
THEIR OWN SPIN ON THE
REALISM AND NATURALISM
THEY HAD INHERITED
FROM EUROPE, AND THEY
TURNED THEIR ATTENTION
TO LOCAL INTERESTS
AS A MEANS OF CONCEIVING
OF NATIONAL IDENTITY.
*
THE DAWN OF THE
TWENTIETH CENTURY
SAW LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE AT A CROSSROADS.
THESE WERE THE YEARS
OF REGIONALISM AND OF
"NOVELLAS DE LA TIERRA",
OR "NOVELS OF THE LAND"
AND THE DEVELOPMENT
OF THE MEXICAN
REVOLUTIONARY NOVEL.
THESE YEARS SAW THE
APPEARANCE OF SOME OF
THE MOST RELEVANT NOVELS
OF THIS LITERATURE,
TITLES SUCH AS
DONA BARBARA,
DON SEGUNDO SOMBRA,
AND THE VORTEX.
IF YOU HAD TO
CHOOSE A SINGLE TERM
TO DEFINE THE LITERATURE
OF REGIONALISM,
THAT WORD WOULD
BE "CONFLICT".
IN THE CHAOTIC PERIOD THAT
WAS THE BEGINNING OF THE
LAST CENTURY, THE NOVELLAS
DE LA TIERRA HIGHLIGHTED
SOCIO-POLITICAL, ECONOMIC,
AND AESTHETIC TENSIONS
IN LATIN
AMERICAN CULTURE.
THE EMERGENCE OF
REGIONALIST LITERATURE
COINCIDED WITH THE
CELEBRATION OF 100 YEARS
OF INDEPENDENCE FOR
MANY FORMER COLONIES.
AS SUCH, THIS WAS A TIME
OF RELENTLESS QUESTIONING
AND REAPPRAISAL ABOUT
THE MEANING OF NATIONAL
IDENTITY AND THE
IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION
FROM EUROPE
AND ELSEWHERE.
SOCIETY ALSO EXPERIENCED
A NEW MIDDLE CLASS
AND THE APPEARANCE OF
WORKERS WHO WERE BECOMING
INCREASINGLY VISIBLE
DUE TO UNION CLASHES
AND POLITICAL
GRIEVANCES.
LATIN AMERICAN LITERATURE
IN THE 20TH CENTURY
HAS TO DO WITH A MOVEMENT
FROM CERTAIN STORYTELLERS
TO MOVE THE GAZE TO
SOMETHING NATIVE,
TO NATURE SCENES BELONGING
TO THEIR COUNTRIES,
TO EMBLEMATIC
CHARACTERS,
TO THE REPRESENTATION
OF CONFLICTS,
AND TENSIONS GENERATED
IN SPECIFIC COMMUNITIES.
IN A WAY, IT'S TAKING UP
WHAT HAD ALREADY BEEN
STARTED BY SOME ROMANTICS
AND BY SOME REALISTS.
BUT THESE REGIONALISTS,
AS THEY'RE CALLED,
WHOM WE FIND IN
THE 20'S AND 30'S,
FAVOR THE INTEGRATION
OF THEIR OWN UNIVERSE,
WITH ITS CONFLICTS AND
THE NATURAL LANDSCAPES OF
THEIR RESPECTIVE COUNTRIES
AND EMBLEMATIC CHARACTERS.
IN THE PERIOD BETWEEN
1915 AND 1930,
THE CONFLICT BEING
WAGED IN THE
NOVELLAS DE LA TIERRA WAS
BETWEEN A NEW GENERATION
OF WRITERS AND AN
AESTHETIC LEGACY
THEY SAW AS PROBLEMATIC AND
ILL-EQUIPPED TO CAPTURE
THE AUTHENTICITY OF
LIFE IN THE NEW WORLD.
THAT LEGACY
WAS REALISM
AND THE
EUROPEAN NATURALIST
AND MODERNIST NOVEL.
THE AUTHORS OF THE
NOVELLAS DE LA TIERRA
DENIGRATED
LITERARY REALISM
AS STYLISTICALLY BLAND
AND ARTISTICALLY LIMITING.
THEY BELIEVED THAT
THESE WERE OUTDATED
FORMS OF EXPRESSION,
THE VOICES OF A PAST
THAT NO LONGER MATTERED.
AND WHILE REALISM OFTEN
TOYED WITH NOTIONS OF
VERISIMILITUDE, MIMESIS
AND REPRESENTATION,
REGIONALIST LITERATURE
CO-OPTED THESE THEMES
AND INJECTED THEM WITH
THE LINGUISTIC INNOVATION
THAT WAS THE HALLMARK
OF MODERNISMO.
AND THEY INVESTIGATED
THE DICHOTOMY
BETWEEN CITY
AND THE COUNTRY.
THEIR WORKS ECHOED
THE ANTITHESIS
PROPOSED BY THE
ARGENTINEAN STATESMAN
AND AUTHOR DOMINGO
FAUSTINO SARMIENTO
MORE THAN A HALF
CENTURY BEFORE -
THE SCHISM BETWEEN
CIVILIZATION AND BARBARISM.
REGIONALISM HAS TO
DO WITH SOMETHING
THAT WASN'T INVENTED
HERE IN LATIN AMERICA,
BUT IS OLDER
IN LITERATURE.
AND IT HAS TO DO WITH
DEFENDING ONE'S OWN,
WITH EXPRESSING
IN LITERATURE
ONE'S OWN CHARACTER, AND
THE CHARACTER OF A REGION.
PUBLISHED IN 1926, THE
NOVEL DON SEGUNDO SOMBRA
IS THE BEST-KNOWN WORK OF
THE ARGENTINEAN WRITER
RICARDO GUIRALDES.
HE WAS A
CONTRIBUTOR TO THE
AVANT GARDE REVIEW MARTIN
FIERRO AND FOUNDER OF THE
JOURNAL PROA, ALONG
WITH JORGE LUIS BORGES,
ROJAS PAZ, AND
BRANDAN CARAFFA.
GUIRALDES STANDS AT THE
INTERSECTION BETWEEN
A REVITALIZED
INTEREST IN CREOLISM
AND THE EUROPEANIST
INTELLECTUAL TRADITION.
RICARDO GUIRALDES SEARCHES
FOR THE ARGENTINE IDENTITY
IN HIS WORKS, AND
THROUGH HIS WORKS.
AND HE BELIEVES THE GAUCHO
IS THE REPRESENTATIVE
OF THAT IDENTITY,
THAT ARGENTINE MEN
SHOULD SEE IN HIM A
MIRROR OF VIRTUES.
AND THAT'S HOW HE'S
DIFFERENT FROM SARMIENTO,
WHO CONSIDERS GAUCHOS
PROTOTYPICAL BARBARIANS.
DON SEGUNDO SOMBRA IS
A BILDUNGSROMAN THAT
CHRONICLES THE MORAL AND
PSYCHOLOGICAL GROWTH
OF A YOUNG MAN
NAMED FABIO CACERES.
THE NOVEL IS SET
IN LAS PAMPAS -
THE GRASS-COVERED PLAINS
EAST OF THE ANDES.
IT RECORDS THE PRACTICAL
KNOWLEDGE OF THE LOCAL FOLK
SUCH AS THE BEST WAY
TO BREAKING WILD HORSES.
AT TWO WEEKS THE
MARES WERE TAME.
DON SEGUNDO, A PRACTICAL
AND PATIENT MAN,
KNEW ALL THE TRICKS
OF THE TRADE.
GRADUALLY AND GENTLY,
HE HAD FULFILLED THE
DIFFICULT OBLIGATIONS
OF THE TRAINER
AND WE SAW HIM OPEN
THE CATTLE GATES
AND DRIVE STEERS
WITH HIS WILD MARES.
WHEN MY TWO WEEKS OF GREAT
TRANQUILITY WERE OVER,
I GOT SOME BAD NEWS:
IN TOWN THEY KNEW
MY WHEREABOUTS,
AND MIGHT POSSIBLY FORCE
ME TO RETURN HOME.
NO WAY WOULD I GO
BACK TO LOAF AROUND
THE BORING STREETS.
I WAS, ONCE AND
FOR ALL, A FREE MAN
WHO WAS EARNING
HIS DAILY BREAD,
AND I WOULD RATHER
LIVE LIKE A PUMA
PERCHED IN THE HAYSTACKS,
THAN LIKE A LITTLE DOG
NESTLED BETWEEN SKIRTS,
STINKING OF CHURCH INCENSE
AND THE SCOLDINGS OF
MUSTACHED BOSSY WOMEN.
GUIRALDES CONSTRUCTED
A WORK THAT,
UNLIKE OTHER NOVELS
OF THE GENRE,
HE TRAFFICS NOT IN
CONFLICT BUT RATHER
INVESTIGATES THEMES OF
HARMONY AND RECONCILIATION.
HE DESCRIBED A PEOPLE
AND A LANDSCAPE THAT
NO LONGER EXISTED,
GENERATED BY THE
REINVENTION OF THE PAST
AND THE VISION OF
A RURAL UTOPIA.
HE THUS SHAPED WHAT
THE ARGENTINEAN CRITIC
BEATRIZ SARLO CALLS A
"RUSTIC GOLDEN AGE",
A CREATION THAT
IS AT ITS CORE
A RESPONSE TO MODERNIZATION
AND URBANIZATION
WITH THEIR ATTENDANT
UNREST AND TENSION.
HIS CHARACTERS ARE OF
A PIECE WITH NATURE,
AND SHOW ANOTHER DYNAMIC,
ANOTHER WAY OF LIVING
THROUGH WORK, FREE TIME,
LEARNING, AND ROUTINE.
THIS DYNAMIC IS WORLDS
AWAY FROM THE VERTIGINOUS
RHYTHM OF THE MODERN
CITY, WHICH GUIRALDES HAD
EXPERIENCED BOTH IN BUENOS
AIRES AND LATER IN PARIS,
WHERE HE BEGAN
WRITING THE NOVEL.
DON SEGUNDO SOMBRA
PRESENTS A NARRATIVE
LIBERATED FROM STRIFE
AND COMPLEXITY,
THE POLAR OPPOSITE OF
MODERNITY'S QUAGMIRE.
IN 1924, THE COLOMBIAN
WRITER JOSE EUSTASIO RIVERA
PUBLISHED THE VORTEX.
THE NOVEL'S PROTAGONIST
IS ARTURO COVA,
AND IT IS SET IN
THE VAST REGION
THAT STRETCHES FROM THE
PLAINS TO THE JUNGLE,
BETWEEN BRAZIL,
VENEZUELA, AND PERU.
AS THE ILL-FATED AFFAIR
BETWEEN ARTURO AND HIS
LOVER ALICIA UNFOLDS, THE
CHARACTERS MAKE THEIR WAY
DEEP INTO THE JUNGLE,
INTO THE SAVAGE UNKNOWN.
THE LOVERS BECOME
SEPARATED FROM EACH OTHER,
AND IN THE NARRATIVE
DISPLACEMENTS ALSO ARISE,
GIVING VOICE TO A
VARIETY OF CHARACTERS.
AMONG THEM IS
CLEMENTE SILVA,
A RUBBER PLANTATION
WORKER WHO
RECOUNTS A TRAGIC
TALE OF EXPLOITATION.
THE NOVEL EXPOSES THE
APPALLING CONDITIONS
IN THE RUBBER
FACTORIES, AS WELL AS
THE TREMENDOUS HARDSHIP
FACED BY THOSE
WHO TRIED TO EKE OUT A
LIVING IN THE RAINFOREST.
IT'S A NOVEL WHERE THE
ENVIRONMENT IS FUNDAMENTAL.
SO MUCH SO THAT IT'S BEEN
CALLED A NOVEL OF SPACE.
AND SPACE WHICH IS, I
DON'T KNOW IF IT'S
TOO MUCH TO SAY THIS
- PERSONIFIED -
BUT IT DOES HAVE AN ACTIVE
PRESENCE, THE JUNGLE.
IT'S A NOVEL WHERE YOU SEE
THROUGH THE CHARACTERS
THE VIOLENCE
OF THE PLACE,
ASSOCIATED WITH THE
VIOLENCE OF NATURE.
WHEN IT SAYS THAT THE
JUNGLE DEVOURED THEM,
IT'S THE JUNGLE APPEARING
AS AN ELEMENT OF THE REGION,
BUT NOT A
DECORATIVE ELEMENT,
AN ACTIVE ELEMENT,
WHICH IS CAPABLE
OF ACTION AND OF SHAPING
CHARACTERS' DESTINIES.
THE VORTEX, ELEGANT IN
STYLE, REPLETE WITH
METAPHOR AND POETRY
YET COARSELY REALISTIC,
DEFIES EASY DEFINITION.
THIS NOVEL PROCESSES THE
INHERITANCE OF NATURALISM
AND REALISM AND THE LEGACY
OF MODERNISM THROUGH
A NEW WORLDVIEW AND A NEW
WAY OF USING LANGUAGE,
AS IS EVIDENCED IN
ITS OPENING PASSAGE.
BEFORE I FELL IN
LOVE WITH ANY WOMAN,
I BET WITH MY
HEART AT RANDOM,
AND IT WON
ME VIOLENCE.
MORE THAN THE ONE IN
LOVE, I WAS ALWAYS THE
DOMINEERING ONE WHOSE
LIPS KNEW NO ENTREATIES.
WITH EVERYTHING, I SOUGHT
OUT THE DIVINE GIFT
OF IDEAL LOVE, THAT IT
CONSUME ME SPIRITUALLY,
SO THAT MY SOUL
GLINTED IN MY BODY
LIKE A FLAME ON THE
LOG THAT FEEDS IT.
THE VORTEX EVOKED
VISIONS OF A BOUNDLESS,
UNTAMED SPACE, AN
APPARITION WITH
FEW ANTECEDENTS IN LATIN
AMERICAN LITERATURE.
THIS KIND OF RUSTIC UTOPIA
HAD BEEN THE PROVINCE OF
EUROPEAN WRITERS SUCH
AS CHATEAUBRIAND...
RUDYARD KIPLING...
JOSEPH CONRAD...
AND THE PRUSSIAN NATURALIST
ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT,
WHO TRAVELED ACROSS
SOUTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA
BETWEEN
1795 AND 1804.
TO CAPTURE THE ENORMITY
AND MENACE OF THE JUNGLE,
THE NOVEL DEPICTS
SCALE AND VIOLENCE
IN A HIGHLY
ORIGINAL WAY.
THE ENGINE OF THE PLOT
IS A CRIME COMMITTED BY
MANKIND AGAINST NATURE
- THE FLATTENING OF THE
RAINFOREST IN HEADLONG
PURSUIT OF RUBBER.
THE OBJECT OF HUMAN
CRUELTY IS THE TREE,
SEVERED AT THE ROOT
FROM THE EARTH
IN THE SERVICE
OF GREED.
THE VIOLENCE OF THE
NARRATIVE IS RECIPROCATED.
THE JUNGLE AVENGES ITSELF
ON THE MEN THAT ABUSE IT
BY MEANS OF VERMIN,
ILLNESS, AND PLAGUE.
THE VORTEX TAKES THE
SENSIBILITIES OF THE
NATURALIST NOVEL TO
ITS AESTHETIC EXTREME,
THEN CAREENS OFF INTO
SATIRE AND THE GROTESQUE.
THE REVELATION OF
THE EARTH'S POWERS
IN ALL ITS TROPICAL
AND MONSTROUS SPLENDOR
STUNNED READERS
AND CRITICS ALIKE.
IN THE VORTEX, THE
JUNGLE APPEARS.
THESE PLACES AND THEIR
INHABITANTS AREN'T JUST
INCORPORATED IN A
REFERENTIAL WAY,
IN A MERELY
FOLKLORIC WAY.
INSTEAD, THEY'RE ALWAYS
CHARGED WITH VALUES
AND A GREAT
SYMBOLIC IMPORTANCE.
SO IN THESE SPACES
YOU HAVE CONFLICTS
AND SITUATIONS
THAT AT SOME POINT
INVOLVE A POSITIONING
OF THESE STORYTELLERS.
THE VORTEX ALSO EXPOSES
THE EXPLOITATION
OF MAN BY MAN.
THE STORY OF ABUSE
UNFOLDS IN A WORLD
OUTSIDE THE BOUNDS
OF LAW AND ORDER.
AS SUCH, IT IS THE
ANTITHESIS, IN MANY WAYS,
OF WHAT WE MIGHT CALL
"NATIONALIST FICTION".
CONTRARY TO WORKS THAT
ESPOUSED HARMONY, SYNTHESIS,
AND A MONOLITHIC
DEFINITION OF NATIONHOOD,
THE VORTEX DWELT ON
THE SHADOWY EDGES
OF CIVILIZATION.
THROUGH ITS PROVOCATIVE
MIX OF REGISTERS, VOICES,
LANGUAGE, AND GENRES,
IT DEBUNKED THE MYTH
OF NATIONHOOD AS
A FAIT ACCOMPLI.
THE LAST CABLE FROM OUR
CONSUL, SENT TO THE
MINISTER AND IN RELATION
TO THE FATE OF ARTURO COVA
AND HIS COMPANIONS, READS,
VERBATIM: CLEMENTE SILVA
HAS BEEN SEARCHING FOR
THEM FOR FIVE MONTHS.
THERE IS NO
TRACE OF THEM.
THE JUNGLE
DEVOURED THEM.
IN 1929, THE VENEZUELAN
WRITER ROMULO GALLEGOS
PUBLISHED A NOVEL THAT
EARNED HIM RENOWN
THROUGHOUT THE
CONTINENT: DONA BARBARA.
GALLEGOS BEGAN HIS
CAREER AS A MODERNISTA,
AND LATER EXPERIMENTED
WITH REALISM.
IN DONA BARBARA, GALLEGOS
INVESTIGATED THE DICHOTOMY
MADE FAMOUS
BY SARMIENTO,
CONTRASTING CIVILIZATION
AND BARBARISM.
DONA BARBARA TELLS THE STORY
OF A YOUNG CITY LAWYER,
SANTOS LUZARDO, WHO
RETURNS TO HIS RURAL ROOTS
TO TAKE CHARGE
OF "ALTAMIRA",
HIS FAMILY'S ESTATE.
THERE HE MEETS
DONA BARBARA,
A CLEVER AND
UNSCRUPULOUS WOMAN
WHO OWNS A HACIENDA
CALLED EL MIEDO.
HER SOLE OBJECTIVE IS
TO DISPOSSESS LUZARDO
OF HIS LAND, AND SHE
WILL STOP AT NOTHING
TO ACHIEVE HER GOAL.
THE NOVEL FEATURES
CLASSIC REALIST DEVICES.
IT IS NARRATED IN
THE THIRD PERSON
OMNISCIENT POINT OF VIEW,
AND THE PLOT UNFOLDS
IN A STANDARD
THREE-PART STRUCTURE.
IT INTRODUCES CHARACTERS
WHO ALLOW FOR VIVID
DESCRIPTIONS OF
LIFE ON THE PLAINS,
THE BACKWARDNESS
AND SUPERSTITION
OF ITS INHABITANTS,
AND THE MODERNIZING
INFLUENCE OF NEW ARRIVALS.
AT ITS HEART, DONA BARBARA
IS A DIDACTIC NOVEL,
DESIGNED TO EXPOSE
THE NATION'S TROUBLES
AND PROPOSE
POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS.
SOCIAL AND POLITICAL
CONFLICT ARE ITS
CENTRAL THEMES, AS IS
THE IDEA THAT LITERATURE
IS THE BEST VEHICLE
FOR RELATING
THE ONGOING STRIFE THAT
DIVIDES THE COUNTRY.
THE PROBLEM, OR THE
PROBLEMS, SANTOS LUZARDO
FINDS IN BRINGING
ABOUT HIS PROJECT,
IS THAT THE PLAINS, THE VERY
LANDSCAPE OF THE REGION
- YOU'LL SEE THAT I
USE DIFFERENT TERMS.
FIRST IT'S THE JUNGLE,
THEN THE PLAINS,
THEN THE "PAMPAS".
THEY EVEN HAVE THEIR
OWN UNIQUE NAMES.
AND HE FINDS AN
ENVIRONMENT THAT DOESN'T
SQUARE WITH HIS
IDEAL PROJECT.
AND THIS WAS A PERSISTENT
CONFLICT IN THE
ORGANIZATION OF LATIN
AMERICAN COUNTRIES.
HAVING A CERTAIN MODEL
OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION
AND THEN FINDING
AN ENVIRONMENT,
A LOT OF PEOPLE
RESPONDING ALONG LINES
THAT WERE DIFFERENT FROM
THOSE THEY WANTED TO IMPOSE.
AS IN THE CASE OF THE
VORTEX, DONA BARBARA IS
AT ODDS WITH THE IDEA
OF NATIONAL LITERATURE.
AND, IN EXPOSING THE DARK
SIDE OF MODERNIZATION,
GALLEGOS EVISCERATED
THE TRADITIONAL ETHOS
OF RURAL FOLKS AND REPLACED
IT WITH A FRACTURED,
NO-HOLDS-BARRED
APPROACH OF MODERNITY.
THE PRAIRIE IS AT ONCE
BEAUTIFUL AND TERRIBLE;
IT HOLDS, WITH
ROOM TO SPARE,
SPLENDID LIFE AND
ATROCIOUS DEATH.
IT THREATENS ON ALL SIDES,
BUT THERE NO ONE FEARS IT.
DONA BARBARA STOPPED
TO CONTEMPLATE
THE OBSTINATE ABERRATION
OF THE LIVESTOCK,
AND WITH THOUGHTS OF HERSELF
THAT BECAME SENSATION,
FELT IN THE FURRED
DRYNESS OF HER TONGUE,
BURNING WITH
FEVER AND THIRST,
THE HARSHNESS AND
BITTERNESS OF THAT LAND
THAT THE STUBBORN BEASTS'
TONGUES WERE LICKING.
THUS WAS SHE IN
HER DILIGENT ZEAL
TO SWEETEN THE LOVE
THAT WAS CONSUMING HER.
THEN, MAKING AN EFFORT
TO FREE HERSELF FROM THE
FASCINATION THAT THOSE
PLACES AND THE SPECTACLE
HELD OVER HER SPIRIT,
SHE SPURRED HER HORSE
AND CONTINUED HER
SOMBER ROAMING.
HORACIO QUIROGA IS
GENERALLY ACKNOWLEDGED
AS ONE OF THE
OUTSTANDING REGIONALISTS
ON THE CONTINENT, CREATING
TALES THAT CAPTURE
THE SPIRIT OF THE RIO
DE LA PLATA REGION.
BORN IN THE
URUGUAYAN CITY OF SALTO,
HE BECAME FASCINATED
WITH THE JUNGLE
WHILE ON A
PHOTOGRAPHIC EXPEDITION
WITH THE WRITER
LEOPOLDO LUGONES.
HE WAS A REGULAR
CONTRIBUTOR TO THE JOURNAL
CARAS Y CARETAS ,
WHICH PUBLISHED SOME OF
HIS BEST-KNOWN STORIES,
SUCH AS SUNSTROKE AND
THE FEATHER PILLOW.
QUIROGA LIVED OFF OF HIS
WORK FOR NEWSPAPERS AND
MAGAZINES, AND THE COURSE
OF HIS CAREER ILLUSTRATES
THE TENSIONS BROUGHT ON
BY THE PROFESSIONALIZATION
OF WRITING IN THE
RIO DE LA PLATA.
HE WAS A WRITER
WHO SYSTEMATICALLY
REFLECTED ON
HIS PROFESSION,
AND PARTICULARLY ON
ITS MATERIAL ASPECTS.
QUIROGA ADOPTED A
SELF-CONSCIOUSLY
PROFESSIONAL ATTITUDE
IN HIS RELATIONSHIP
WITH HIS EMPLOYERS
IN A DETERMINED
BUT NOT ALWAYS SUCCESSFUL
ATTEMPT TO TURN LITERATURE
INTO A REASONABLY
PROFITABLE ACTIVITY.
HE THOUGHT THAT LITERATURE
WAS A PROFESSION.
BUT BEYOND THAT HE THOUGHT
OF WRITING AS MANUFACTURING.
HE WAS VERY AWARE THAT ONE
SHOULD REFINE EACH TEXT.
AND HE WAS
SOMEONE WHO,
SINCE HE HAD A
PUBLISHING BACKGROUND,
HE HAD SOME
THINGS VERY CLEAR.
HE PUT STOCK IN LANGUAGE,
IN STORIES, AND IN BREVITY
AND IN CONTROL
OVER THE STORY
FROM THE
VERY BEGINNING.
CONTROL OVER
THE STORY,
OVER THE CHARACTERS'
PHYSIOGNOMY,
SO THAT THIS
DIDN'T GET SLACK.
ONE OF THE FIRST
WRITERS' SOCIETIES,
IN ARGENTINA AT LEAST,
IS PROMOTED BY
QUIROGA AND LUGONES;
THEY'RE THE FOUNDERS.
SO THE IMAGE OF THE WRITER
BEGINS TO TAKE ON RELEVANCE.
BECAUSE THEY PUT FORTH A
GREAT EFFORT TOWARD THAT
BUT ALSO BECAUSE
INSTITUTIONS BEGIN TO
APPEAR THAT ALLOW THEM TO
GAIN SOCIAL AWARENESS.
WRITERS' SOCIETIES,
WRITERS' CIRCLES,
AND ROUND-TABLE
DISCUSSIONS.
QUIROGA SPECIALIZED IN
AND WAS A MASTER OF
THE SHORT STORY.
HE OUTLINED HIS THEORIES
ON THE GENRE IN HIS FAMOUS
DECALOGUE OF THE
PERFECT STORYTELLER.
QUIROGA DESCRIBED THE
PERFECT SHORT STORY AS
"AN ARROW WHICH,
CAREFULLY SHARPENED,
LEAVES THE BOW TO
HIT THE BULLSEYE".
HIS TALES WERE TYPICALLY
SET IN THE JUNGLE,
AND THE JUNGLE IS IN FACT
THE TRUE PROTAGONIST
OF HIS STORIES.
HE REVELED IN MYSTERY,
HORROR, AND THE FANTASTIC,
PENNING STORIES SUCH AS
"THE DECAPITATED CHICKEN"
AND "THE FEATHER PILLOW"
THAT TRAFFICKED IN
CRUELTY, THE ABSURD,
AND - ALWAYS - DEATH.
FOLLOWING IN THE FOOTSTEPS
OF POE, CHEKHOV,
MAUPASSANT, AND KIPLING,
QUIROGA COMBINED REALISM,
REGIONALISM, AND THE
FANTASTIC IN A CAREFULLY
CRAFTED SYNTAX OF BREVITY,
INTENSITY, AND IMPACT.
HIS WAS A REALIST
LITERATURE THAT SYNTHESIZED
ELEMENTS OF REGIONALISM
AND COSTUMBRISMO,
A SHORT PROSE
FORMAT THAT DEPICTED
LOCAL CUSTOMS
AND MANNERS.
HIS LITERARY STYLE WAS
MARKED BY PRECISION
OF LANGUAGE, PLOT,
AND EXPOSITION.
SOON ALICIA BEGAN TO
HAVE HALLUCINATIONS,
BEWILDERING, THAT
FLOATED AT FIRST,
AND LATER DESCENDED
TO THE GROUND.
THE YOUNG GIRL, WITH EYES
WIDE OPEN, COULD NOT HELP
BUT STARE AT THE RUG ON
EACH SIDE OF THE BED.
ALICIA SLOWLY FADED AWAY
IN HER ANEMIC DELIRIUM,
WHICH WOULD GROW
WORSE IN THE EVENING
AND WITHDRAW IN
THE EARLY HOURS.
DURING THE DAYTIME HER
ILLNESS DID NOT PROGRESS,
BUT EACH MORNING SHE WOKE
LIVID, ALMOST FAINT.
IT SEEMED AS IF ONLY
DURING THE NIGHT
THE LIFE IN HER VANISHED
IN NEW SURGES OF BLOOD.
AS SHE AWAKENED SHE
ALWAYS FELT AS IF
SHE HAD JUST
COLLAPSED ONTO THE BED
WITH A THOUSAND
TONS ON TOP OF HER.
IF THE FIRST PART OF
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
WAS LATIN AMERICA'S
"ERA OF INDEPENDENCE",
THE REMAINING DECADES
WERE TAKEN UP WITH
MAKING POLITICAL,
CULTURAL, SOCIAL,
AND ECONOMIC SENSE
OF THAT INDEPENDENCE.
BECAUSE THE IMPERIUM OF
POWER HAD PASSED FROM
COLONIAL OVERLORDS TO THE
RESIDENT UPPER CLASSES,
EXPLOITATION, DEPENDENCE,
AND BACKWARDNESS OFTEN
REMAINED AND SOMETIMES
BECAME EVEN HARSHER.
AND THOSE WHO FOUND
THEMSELVES CUT OUT OF
THE POWER DYNAMIC WERE THE
VERY SAME PEOPLE WHO HAD
ENDURED THE MOST HARM
SINCE THE CONQUEST:
THE PRE-COLUMBIAN
INDIGENOUS POPULATION.
THIS CYCLE OF OPPRESSION
WAS DIFFERENT
IN EACH COUNTRY, AND
HAD SPECIFIC AESTHETIC
AND ARTISTIC
MANIFESTATIONS AS WELL.
IN MEXICO, WHERE
COLONIAL SOCIETY HAD BEEN
DEEPLY ENTRENCHED,
POLITICAL INDEPENDENCE
WAS JUST THE BEGINNING
OF A COMPLETE MAKEOVER
OF THE COUNTRY'S CULTURAL
AND SOCIAL FABRIC.
THE MEXICAN REVOLUTION
WAS A VERITABLE
KALEIDOSCOPE OF
OPPOSING INTERESTS.
IT INVOLVED PLAYERS FROM
ALL SOCIAL CLASSES,
REPRESENTING A DIZZYING
ARRAY OF IDEOLOGIES.
FRANCISCO MADERO, EMILIANO
ZAPATA, PANCHO VILLA,
ALVARO OBREGON,
JUSTINIANO CARRANZA.
THEY IGNITED MEXICO AND
THE ENTIRE CONTINENT
IN A SOCIAL CONFLAGRATION
THAT SPANNED THE DECADE
FROM 1910 TO 1920.
THE REVOLUTION INVOLVED
MANY KEY INTELLECTUALS
OF THE TIME, WHO
ACTIVELY PARTICIPATED
BOTH IN POLITICS
AND IN BATTLE.
THIS HANDS-ON INVOLVEMENT
GAVE RISE TO A GENRE
THAT WAS TO HAVE A
PROFOUND ARTISTIC
AND CULTURAL IMPACT -
THE REVOLUTIONARY NOVEL.
TO THIS DAY, SCHOLARS
STILL FIERCELY DEBATE
THE EXACT ORIGINS
AND PARAMETERS
OF THE
REVOLUTIONARY NOVEL.
HOWEVER, CRITICS GENERALLY
AGREE THAT THE CYCLE BEGAN
WITH MARIANO AZUELA'S WORK
ENTITLED THE UNDERDOGS.
PUBLISHED AS A SERIAL
IN THE MEXICAN NEWSPAPER
EL PASO DEL NORTE,
" THE UNDERDOGS"
WAS A FIRST-HAND
DESCRIPTION OF COMBAT
DURING THE
MEXICAN REVOLUTION,
BASED ON AZUELA'S
EXPERIENCES IN THE FIELD.
IT HAS BEEN CALLED A "NOVEL
OF THE PEOPLE IN ARMS"
AND EVEN "AN EPIC
POEM IN PROSE".
IT FEARLESSLY DEPICTS
THE PASSION AND
DISILLUSIONMENT THAT
SEEM TO BE INTRINSIC
TO ALL GREAT
MOMENTS IN HISTORY.
THE UNDERDOGS IS A NOVEL
WITH RURAL PROTAGONISTS.
NOT PANCHO VILLA AS THE
HERO, BUT HE'S ALLUDED TO.
AND WHAT YOU HAVE IS A
GROUP OF RURAL PEOPLE
WHO RISE UP AGAINST
THE LANDOWNER.
AND THE UNIQUE ASPECT
OF THE NOVEL IS THAT
THESE PEOPLE ARE
NOT IDEALIZED.
THEY ARE SHOWN WITH
THEIR CONTRADICTIONS,
THEIR CRUELTIES.
SO WHEN THESE EXPLOITED
PEOPLE TRIUMPH,
THEY CAN BE JUST
AS CRUEL AS
THEY THEMSELVES
HAD BEEN TREATED.
AND SOME INTELLECTUALS
APPEAR WHO TRY TO
INTERPRET THE REVOLUTION
AS A HEROIC GESTURE.
THE UNDERDOGS HAS TWO MAIN
PROTAGONISTS WHO ARE
IN MANY WAYS ANTITHETICAL
TO ONE ANOTHER:
DEMETRIO MACIAS
AND LUIS CERVANTES.
DEMETRIO IS AN ORDINARY
GUY WHO THROWS HIMSELF
INTO THE REBELLION WHERE
HE BECOMES A LEADER,
OR A "BANDIDO"
- OUTLAW.
HE YEARNS FOR A BETTER
LIFE, AND WHILE HE MAY
BE UNSOPHISTICATED TO
THE WAYS OF THE WORLD,
HE IS STRAIGHTFORWARD AND
SINCERE IN HIS INTENTIONS.
LUIS CERVANTES, BY
CONTRAST, IS AN OBSEQUIOUS
INTELLECTUAL
WHO SERVES POWER
AND KNOWS HOW
TO PULL STRINGS.
HIS GUILE AND TREACHERY TO
REVOLUTIONARY IDEALS ARE,
IN THE IRONY OF
AZUELA'S NARRATIVE,
ULTIMATELY REWARDED.
BY THE END OF THE
STORY, DEMETRIO,
DEFEATED AND HUNTED,
IS A MAN LAID LOW
BY POLITICS HE
CANNOT COMPREHEND.
THE JUXTAPOSITION OF
THE NAIVE DEMETRIO
WITH THE CUNNING LUIS
HIGHLIGHTS THE
REVOLUTION'S CONTRADICTIONS
AND COMPLEXITIES; THAT
IT IS SIMULTANEOUSLY
IDEALISTIC AND
ROTTEN AT THE CORE,
A TIME BOTH OF POSSIBILITY
AND OF CLOSURE.
LUIS CERVANTES HAD NOT
YET MANAGED TO DETECT
THE EXACT SHAPE OF
THE OBJECTS ABOUT HIM.
SEEKING THE MOST SUITABLE
RESTING PLACE, HE LAID HIS
WEARY BONES DOWN ON A
FRESH PILE OF MANURE
UNDER THE BLURRED MASS
OF A HUIZACHE TREE.
HE LAY DOWN, MORE
EXHAUSTED THAN RESIGNED,
AND CLOSED HIS EYES,
RESOLUTELY DETERMINED
TO SLEEP UNTIL HIS FIERCE
KEEPERS OR THE MORNING SUN,
BURNING HIS EARS,
AWAKENED HIM.
OTHER KEY NOVELS OF THIS
GENRE WERE WRITTEN BY
YOUNGER AUTHORS WHO GREW
UP DURING THE REVOLUTION.
THEY INCLUDE THE
EAGLE AND THE SERPENT
AND THE SHADOW
OF THE LEADER
BY MARTIN
LUIS GUZMAN;
THE INDIAN FROM 1935 BY
GREGORIO LOPEZ FUENTES;
IF THEY MUST KILL ME
TOMORROW BY RAFAEL MUNOZ;
AND CARTRIDGE: TALES
OF THE STRUGGLE
IN THE NORTH
OF MEXICO
AN INTRIGUING
NOVEL TOLD FROM
THE POINT OF VIEW OF
A 10-YEAR-OLD GIRL,
WRITTEN BY NELLIE
CAMPOBELLO.
THROUGH SUCCESSIVE
READINGS AND
REINTERPRETATION, THE
MEXICAN REVOLUTION AND ITS
LITERATURE WERE REPRISED
IN SEMINAL TEXTS
FROM THE SECOND HALF OF
THE TWENTIETH CENTURY.
THESE WORKS INCLUDE PEDRO
PARAMO BY JUAN RULFO,
AND THE DEATH OF ARTEMIO
CRUZ BY CARLOS FUENTES.
FUENTES EXPERIMENTED WITH
POINT OF VIEW IN HIS NOVEL
- A THIRD OF THE BOOK IS
RELATED FROM THE SECOND
PERSON POINT OF VIEW,
WITH THE FIRST AND THIRD
PERSONS COMPRISING
THE REST OF THE BOOK.
ALL THREE PERSPECTIVES
TELL THE SAME STORY
FROM DIFFERENT JUNCTURES
IN ITS TIMELINE.
TAKEN TOGETHER, THE NOVEL
RESOUNDINGLY CRITIQUES
THE ROOTS OF THE REVOLUTION
THROUGH AN ACCOUNT OF
ARTEMIO CRUZ'S
LIFE AND DEATH.
THUS ENDS ONE CYCLE
AND BEGINS ANOTHER:
THAT OF THE LATIN
AMERICAN BOOM.
THE REVOLUTIONARY NOVEL
HAD SEVERAL POINTS
OF CONTACT WITH
ANOTHER LITERARY TREND
IN THE CONTINENT - THE
INDIGENIST NARRATIVE.
THIS GENRE ARTICULATED
THE EXPERIENCE OF
SOUTH AMERICA'S NATIVE
PEOPLES, AND WAS STRONGLY
ANCHORED IN POLITICS,
REVOLUTION, AND MARXISM.
IN THE FIRST DECADES OF
THE TWENTIETH CENTURY,
THE EMIGRATION OF
REALISM AND NATURALISM
TO LATIN AMERICA
PROMPTED A NEW LOOK
AT THE ROLE OF
INDIGENOUS PEOPLE
IN THE CONTINENT'S
CULTURAL FABRIC,
ESPECIALLY IN PERU,
ECUADOR, AND BOLIVIA.
THE TRANSITIONAL WORK THAT
GOES FROM A REPRESENTATION
THAT'S A BIT
MORE INDIGENIST,
A BIT MORE IDEALIZED,
TO A REPRESENTATION
THAT'S MORE CRITICAL.
BECAUSE HERE,
EXPLOITATION FOR INSTANCE,
WHICH IS A PART OF ALL OF
THE INDIGENIST STORIES,
FROM THE STRICTLY
INDIGENIST ANGLE,
ISN'T SEEN AS
A MORAL PROBLEM.
SO THERE AREN'T PEOPLE
WHO ARE MORALLY BAD,
WHO HAVE CHARACTER FLAWS
THAT LEAD TO EXPLOITATION.
INSTEAD, EXPLOITATION IS
THE PRODUCT OF A SYSTEM.
THE STANDARD DEPICTION OF
THE INDIAN AS A "PROBLEM"
HAD DATED BACK TO
THE CONQUEST ITSELF,
AND INCORPORATED
PRECONCEIVED NOTIONS
OF NATURAL LAW, RELIGION,
AND NATIONAL IDENTITIES.
WHENEVER NATIVE VOICES
WERE HEARD, THEY WERE
TYPICALLY MEDIATED BY AN
EDITOR OR TRANSLATOR WHO
SMOOTHED OVER THE ROUGH
EDGES OF THEIR NARRATIVES
SO AS NOT TO OFFEND
NON-NATIVE EARS.
THE INDIGENOUS PERSON
WAS AN OBJECT OF STUDY,
INTERPRETATION, SCORN,
OR IDLE CURIOSITY,
NOT OF ADMIRATION
OR RESPECT.
THE REPRESENTATION OF
NATIVE TRIBES AND OF THEIR
EXPLOITATION AND SUFFERING
TOOK ON A MUCH DIFFERENT
CHARACTER IN THE
NINETEENTH CENTURY.
WITH INDEPENDENCE CAME
REASSESSMENT, AND WITH
ROMANTICISM CAME A RENEWED
INTEREST IN NATIONAL
IDENTITY, OFTEN ALLIED
WITH AN IDEALIZED
OR NOSTALGIC VERSION
OF NATIVE HISTORY.
THE TROUBLING
PRESENCE OF THE INDIAN
IN MODERN LATIN AMERICA
BECAME ENMESHED
WITH THE AESTHETICS OF
REALISM AND NATURALISM.
THE RESULT WAS
WORKS SUCH AS
CLORINDA MATTO
DE TURNER'S
BIRDS WITHOUT A NEST,
PUBLISHED IN 1889.
IN THE PREFACE, THE
AUTHOR DECLARED THAT HER
INTENTION WAS FOR THIS
WORK TO BE "THE PHOTOGRAPH
THAT STEREOTYPES THE VICES
AND VIRTUES OF A PEOPLE".
AS SUCH, IT IS AN EXAMPLE
OF COSTUMBRISMO -
A LITERARY SKETCH OF
CUSTOMS AND MANNERS,
A FORM THAT HAD
BECOME POPULAR
IN THE LATE
NINETEENTH CENTURY.
MATTO WAS A WOMAN WHO
CAME FROM THE INTERIOR,
NEAR CUZCO.
AND THIS ALLOWED HER
TO BE ACQUAINTED WITH
THE REALITY OF THE
MOUNTAINOUS REGION
AND HOW THE INDIGENOUS
PEOPLE LIVED AT THE TIME.
SO IN THIS WORK,
BIRDS WITHOUT A NEST,
SHE REPRESENTS THE PROBLEM
OF THE INDIGENOUS PEOPLE
AND THEIR COMMUNITIES
MIRED IN IGNORANCE,
IN EXTREME POVERTY,
AND IN EXPLOITATION
BY THE GOVERNOR, BY
THE ENCOMENDEROS,
PERHAPS THEY WERE
CALLED DIFFERENTLY
BUT THEY WERE
ENCOMENDEROS NONETHELESS;
AND THE PRIEST,
WHO MANIPULATES THE
CONSCIENCE OF THE
SOUL AND THE SPIRIT
TO HELP MAINTAIN THAT
STATE OF AFFAIRS.
BIRDS WITHOUT A NEST
FORESHADOWED CONCERNS
THAT WOULD BE REVISITED
IN THE LITERATURE
AND THE POLITICS OF
THE NEXT CENTURY.
IN THE PERUVIAN
PROVINCES,
WHERE THEY BREED THE
ALPACA AND WHERE
TRAFFIC IN WOOL IS THE
CHIEF SOURCE OF RICHES,
THERE EXISTS ALMOST
WITHOUT EXCEPTION
THE CUSTOM KNOWN AS
"DISTRIBUTION IN ADVANCE"
WHICH THE
BUSINESS MAGNATES,
THE WELL-TO-DO PEOPLE
OF THE PLACE, PRACTICE.
FOR THE PAYMENT IN ADVANCE
WHICH THE WOOL BUYERS
MAKE AND FORCE THE
INDIANS TO ACCEPT,
THEY FIX THE PRICE OF A
QUINTAL OF WOOL SO LOW
THAT THE GAIN WHICH
THE CAPITAL INVESTED
IS MADE TO PRODUCE
EXCEEDS 500%.
THIS USURY, TOGETHER
WITH THE EXTORTION
THAT GOES WITH IT,
TURNS EXISTENCE
INTO A VIRTUAL HELL
FOR THOSE BARBARIANS.
THE INDIANS WHO ARE
OWNERS OF ALPACAS
EMIGRATE FROM
THEIR HUTS
DURING THE TIME
OF DISTRIBUTION,
IN ORDER NOT TO RECEIVE
THE MONEY ADVANCED,
WHICH FOR THEM IS
ALMOST AS CURSED AS THE
THIRTY PIECES OF SILVER
RECEIVED BY JUDAS.
THE FIRST DECADES OF THE
TWENTIETH CENTURY BROUGHT
FORTH SOME OF THE MOST
ENDURING INDIGENIST NOVELS:
BRONZE RACE BY THE
BOLIVIAN WRITER
ALCIDES ARGUEDAS,
PUBLISHED IN 1919;
THE WHITE LLAMA BY
VENTURA GARCIA CALDERON
OF PERU, FROM 1924;
HUASIPUNGO BY JORGE
ICAZA OF ECUADOR,
PUBLISHED IN 1934;
AND BROAD AND
ALIEN IS THE WORLD
BY PERUVIAN CIRO
ALEGRIA, FROM 1941.
EACH IN THEIR OWN WAY,
THESE WORKS OFFERED
A DIRECT AND RAW VIEW OF
THE ABORIGINAL REALITY,
A FAR CRY FROM THE
STANDARD MYTHIC
IDEALIZATION OF THE
GLORIOUS PRE-HISPANIC PAST.
ALTHOUGH AT TIMES
PATERNALISTIC
OR BLATANTLY BIASED,
THESE WORKS UNBLINKINGLY
PORTRAY THE INJUSTICES
THAT WERE METED OUT
AGAINST INDIGENOUS
PEOPLES.
THEY DENOUNCE THE
PRACTICES OF CACIQUISMO
AND GAMONALISMO,
SEMI-FEUDAL SYSTEMS RUN
BY CRUEL LOCAL BOSSES.
THEY CONDEMNED THE
RELENTLESS EXPLOITATION
OF INDIAN POPULATIONS;
AND THEY MOURNED THE
APPARENTLY IRRESOLVABLE
CONFLICT BETWEEN
INDIAN AND WHITE MAN,
AND THE ENDLESS CYCLE
OF NATIVE REVOLT
THAT INVARIABLY ENDED
IN DEFEAT, HUMILIATION,
AND FAILURE.
SOCIAL ISSUES
BECOME MORE RAW.
YOU START TO SENSE THE
PRESENCE OF THE INDIAN
BEFORE OTHER
SOCIAL ELEMENTS
AND WE START
TO SENSE CONFLICT.
THESE INDIANS ARE
GENERALLY SERVANTS,
THE SERVANTS
OF THE WEALTHY.
AND SO SEVERAL NOVELS
COME FROM THE EXPERIENCE
OF THESE PEOPLE WHO CAME
FROM ANOTHER CLASS,
BECAUSE MAYBE THEIR PARENTS
HAD A LARGE RURAL ESTATE,
AND THEY SAW WHAT WAS GOING
ON WITH THESE INDIANS.
AND YOU MIGHT COMPARE IT
TO NOVELS ABOUT SLAVERY.
THE WRITER WHO ELEVATED
INDIGENOUS LITERATURE
TO THE NEXT LEVEL WAS JOSE
MARIA ARGUEDAS OF PERU.
HE PENNED SOME OF THE MOST
LUMINOUSLY BEAUTIFUL PROSE
EVER TO COME OUT
OF LATIN AMERICA.
BORN AND RAISED
IN POVERTY
AMONGST THE
QUECHUA INDIANS,
HE LEARNED TO SPEAK BOTH
QUECHUA AND SPANISH.
ARGUEDAS LATER ATTENDED
THE UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL
MAYOR DE SAN MARCOS, WHERE
HE STUDIED ANTHROPOLOGY.
IN HIS EARLY LITERARY
OUTPUT, ARGUEDAS NATURALLY
GRAVITATED TOWARDS THE
QUECHUA EXPERIENCE,
WHICH ALLOWED
HIM TO INDULGE
HIS ANTHROPOLOGICAL
INTERESTS
WHILE INVESTIGATING HIS
OWN MULTICULTURAL ROOTS.
INEVITABLY HE WAS DRAWN
TO EXAMINING THE CLASH
BETWEEN THE WHITE MAN'S
"CIVILIZED" LIFESTYLE
AND THE "TRADITIONAL"
INDIGENOUS WAY OF LIFE.
THE INFLUENCE OF THE
QUECHUA LANGUAGE,
WHICH ALLOWS FOR SUBTLE
SHADES OF MEANING,
PERVADES HIS WORK,
INFUSING IT WITH
LYRICISM AND
EXPRESSIVENESS.
HIS POETRY WAS
PUBLISHED IN QUECHUA,
AND IN HIS NOVELS
HE TYPICALLY USED
NATIVE SYNTAX WITH
SPANISH VOCABULARY.
REGARDLESS OF THE GENRE,
HE MINED HIS OWN PAST
TO CONJURE A PAST THAT WAS
A KIND OF ARCHAIC UTOPIA.
THE CASE OF JOSE MARIA
ARGUEDAS IS VERY IMPORTANT
TO THE HISTORY OF LATIN
AMERICAN LITERATURE
BECAUSE HE TRIES TO
CONSTRUCT A PLACE THAT
WOULD DISTANCE HIM FROM
CONVENTIONAL REGIONALISM.
IN WHAT SENSE?
HE WAS A
BILINGUAL WRITER.
SO HE WAS A COMING
TOGETHER OF TWO LANGUAGES:
SPANISH AND QUECHUA.
QUECHUA WAS ALSO HIS
NATIVE LANGUAGE.
AND THAT'S WHERE
THE PROBLEM BEGINS.
IN THE OTHER CASES
YOU SEE A DISTANCING,
EVEN THOUGH THERE
WAS GOOD FAITH.
EVEN THOUGH IT WAS MEANT
TO BRING THE READER CLOSER
TO THOSE REALITIES, A
DISTANCING WAS PRODUCED.
AND ONE CAN
EXPERIENCE IT
BY READING THOSE
NOVELS TODAY.
AND JOSE MARIA ARGUEDAS
DECIDED TO BREAK DOWN
THAT DISTANCE.
HE BEGINS BY TRYING
TO BUILD A PLACE
OF PROCLAMATION, ONE THAT
ISN'T HIMSELF BROUGHT
CLOSER TO THE READER
AS OPPOSED TO THE REST.
HIS FIRST NOVEL,
PUBLISHED IN 1941,
WAS ENTITLED
YAWAR FIESTA.
IT BROUGHT TOGETHER MANY
ELEMENTS THAT WOULD BE
REPRISED IN HIS LATER
WORKS: THE LUCID AND
UNAFFECTED PERSPECTIVE
OF A CHILD NARRATOR;
THE ANDES DEPICTED
IN ALL THEIR
INTENSE
NATURAL BEAUTY;
THE CONFLICT BETWEEN
INDIANS AND WHITES;
NATIVE SUBMISSION
AND EXPLOITATION;
THE CULTURAL WEIGHT
OF THE CHURCH
AND FIERCE CRITICISM
OF ITS MANIPULATIONS;
AND THE CENTRAL
AND COMPLEX ROLE
OF THE MIXED-RACE PEOPLE
KNOWN AS MESTIZOS,
WHO WERE
SOMETIMES SERVILE
AND AT OTHER
TIMES REBELLIOUS.
THE TOWN LOOKS BIG AS
IT FOLLOWS THE SLOPE
OF THE MOUNTAIN; FROM
THE BANKS OF A STREAM,
WHERE EUCALYPTUS
TREES GROW,
THE TILED ROOFS RISE UP
TO THE TOP OF THE RIDGE;
AT THE TOP THEY COME TO AN
END BECAUSE GIRON BOLIVAR,
THE STREET WHERE
LEADING CITIZENS LIVE,
IS ON THE RIDGE,
AND THERE THE ROOFS ARE
WHITE, OF CORRUGATED TIN.
ON THE MOUNTAIN FLANKS,
ALMOST WITHOUT STREETS,
AMID BARLEY FIELDS,
WITH LARGE CORRALS
WHERE CUSHION PLANTS AND
LEAFY PEPPER TREES GROW,
THE HOUSES OF THE
COMUNEROS IN THE AYLLUS
OF PUQUIO RESEMBLE
AN INDIAN TOWN.
INDIAN TOWN, ON THE
MOUNTAINSIDE, BY A STREAM.
ARGUEDAS' BOOK DEEP RIVERS
IS THE MOST WELL KNOWN
AND PERHAPS THE
BEST OF HIS NOVELS.
IN IT HE CONJURES AN
UNFORGETTABLE CHARACTER,
ERNESTO, A CHILD THROUGH
WHOSE EYES A BRUTAL
AND INCOMPREHENSIBLE
WORLD IS REVEALED.
ERNESTO IS A BOY OF
EUROPEAN ANCESTRY
WHO IS RAISED
AMONG INDIANS
AND THEN RETURNED
TO THE WHITE WORLD.
HE EMBODIES THE PAINFUL
ANTAGONISM OF TWO WORLDS
THAT ARE AT WAR
- BOTH IN THE WORLD
AND IN HIS OWN PSYCHE.
THE BOY NARRATES THIS
TRAGIC CONFLICT AS IT
UNFOLDS IN CUZCO,
AND THE BEAUTIFUL
AND ANCIENT MOUNTAIN
CITY OF ABANCAY:
ERNESTO'S TIME AT
A RELIGIOUS SCHOOL;
A REVOLT LED BY WOMEN
WHO SELL A MAIZE LIQUOR
CALLED CHICHA; AND A
DEVASTATING PLAGUE
THAT ENDS THE NOVEL.
THE LANDSCAPE STANDS
AS SILENT WITNESS
TO THE NEVER-ENDING
CONFLICT, STARTING WITH
THE BROKEN YET STILL
IMPOSING STONES OF CUZCO,
WHICH ERNESTO LOOKS UPON
WITH RESPECT AND FEAR.
DAD, I SAID, EACH STONE
HAS SOMETHING TO SAY;
LET'S WAIT.
WE'RE NOT GOING
TO HEAR ANYTHING.
IT'S NOT THAT THEY
SPEAK, YOU'RE CONFUSED.
THEY TRAVEL
INTO YOUR MIND
AND IT IS FROM THERE
THAT THEY TROUBLE YOU.
EACH STONE
IS DIFFERENT;
THEY'RE NOT CUT OUT,
THEY'RE MOVING.
THEY SEEM TO BE MOVING
BECAUSE THEY'RE UNEVEN,
EVEN MORE THAN THE STONES
OUT IN THE FIELDS.
FOR THE INCAS TURNED
STONES INTO MUD
AS I HAVE TOLD
YOU MANY TIMES.
DAD, IT LOOKS LIKE
THEY'RE WALKING.
THEY TOSS AND TURN AND
THEN THEY'RE STILL.
WHEREVER I GO, THE STONES
THAT WERE SENT TO BE MADE
BY INCA ROCA SHALL
KEEP ME COMPANY.
WITH GREAT LYRIC BEAUTY,
ARGUEDAS CONSTRUCTED
A NOVEL OF MANY VOICES
IN WHICH NATURE,
IMPETUOUS AND CAPRICIOUS,
IS THE MAIN PROTAGONIST.
IN A TALE FILLED WITH THE
WORKINGS OF MEMORY AND THE
STRANGENESS INHERENT IN
ERNESTO'S BILINGUALISM,
NATURE IS THE POINT
OF ENTRY FOR MAGIC
AND ANIMISM, AND
FOR NATIVE BELIEFS.
ERNESTO'S WORLD
IS INHABITED
NOT ONLY BY
HUMAN BEINGS -
THE FRIARS AND BOARDING
SCHOOL STUDENTS,
THE NATIVES AND
THE CHICHERAS -
BUT ALSO AND ESPECIALLY
BY THE URUTURCO,
A RIVER OF
VIOLENT GREEN
THAT CROSSES THE MOUNTAINS
AND PROVIDES ONE OF
THE POSSIBLE MEANINGS
OF THE NOVEL'S TITLE.
SUFFUSED WITH THE
MUSICALITY OF
QUECHUA WORDS AND
SYNTAX, DEEP RIVERS IS
A COMPELLING NARRATIVE,
A CULTURAL TOUCHSTONE,
AND A DEVASTATING SOCIAL
CRITIQUE WRAPPED INTO ONE.
IT LAYS BARE THE
COMPLEXITIES OF A
PLURALIST CULTURE WHERE
VARIOUS NATIONS AND
MINORITIES COEXIST
UNEASILY, AND AS SUCH
LAYS OUT THE MOST ACUTE
POLITICAL CHALLENGES
FACING LATIN AMERICA.
IN DEEP RIVERS
WE FIND SOMETHING
RATHER INTERESTING.
HE WANTS TO AVOID A
TYPICAL ELEMENT IN THESE
REGIONALIST NOVELS,
THAT IS, THE GLOSSARY.
AT THE END OF THE
NOVEL OR IN FOOTNOTES
WE FIND DEFINITIONS
OF WORDS,
REFERRING TO THIS OR
THAT TYPE OF PLANT.
TRYING TO EXPLAIN A TERM
RELATED TO AN ANIMAL
OR PLANT OR
EVEN LOCAL WAYS.
WHAT HE WANTS IS TO
INCORPORATE THAT
INTO THE NARRATION.
THEREFORE, THE READER
GOES ON IMAGINING THINGS,
OR EVEN WORDS, THROUGH
THE WAY IN WHICH HE
PRESENTS THEM AND THROUGH
THE IMAGES HE PROVIDES.
AS LATIN AMERICA SHED ITS
COLONIAL PAST AND SETTLED
INTO SECURE NATIONAL
IDENTITIES, IT WAS ALMOST
INEVITABLE THAT LITERATURE
WOULD FOCUS ITS ATTENTION
ON LOCAL ISSUES AND
NATIVE EXPERIENCE.
YET, IN A WORLD OF IRONY
AND CONTRADICTIONS,
LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE OF THE EARLY
TWENTIETH CENTURY OFFERED
UP A WIDE SPECTRUM
OF PERSPECTIVES THAT OFTEN
COMPETED WITH ONE ANOTHER.
MODERNISMO EFFECTED A
PROFOUND TRANSFORMATION
IN THE LANGUAGE
OF LITERATURE.
THE AVANT GARDE STRETCHED
THE BOUNDARIES OF
AESTHETICS AND OF
POLITICAL ACTIVISM.
MEANWHILE, THE
NOVELLA DE LA TIERRA,
REGIONALIST LITERATURE,
AND INDIGENIST NARRATIVES
LOOKED TO
THE REAL LIVES
BEING LIVED BY
EVERYDAY FOLKS,
ELEVATING THE DOWNTRODDEN
AND THE IGNORED
TO THE STATUS OF
CULTURAL OBJECTS
WORTHY OF DISCUSSION.
WHILE SOMETIMES OBLIQUE
OR PATERNALISTIC,
THESE LITERARY EFFORTS
SHOW THE COMPLEXITY
OF THE WORLD THEY
TRIED TO RECREATE
AND EXPOSE THE INJUSTICE
AND THE SUBMISSION
THAT SCAR THE HISTORY
OF THE CONTINENT.
*